MONDAY:

—Logistics:
* Delay in email re: Quercus. Please update your contact preferences to receive announcements immediately (demonstrate this)
* Tutorials:
(1) I have heard that many people brought questions to class; thanks for enthusiasm; you still only get credit for questions you ask in the formal period; we won’t always have time for everybody
(2) that said, tutorials are very unbalanced: Friday tutorials are quite empty. Please consider changing tutorials if you can.
* Readings from books
* Logistical questions?

—Recap from last week
* We ended last week with the question: how can psychological integration be a political problem?
—who counts as human (e.g. women, queers, and racialized folks live as split subjects);
—what counts as intelligible (Rancière, distribution of the sensible);
—what is the subject position supposed to do (buy things [H&A]; obey the law [L. Althusser])
* Why Williams is important:
—she recognizes the ways in which Hollywood started working through issues:
* the aesthetic problem of narrative vs. attraction is a political problem
* the problem cuts across the forms of films (& moviegoing is a part of cinematic form)
* she helps set out a bunch of problems we’ll be working through together: structures of subjectivity; historiography; spectatorship & reception; politics & aesthetics

* What we didn’t get to: Barthes. I’ll start lecturing about Barthes after the questions period, alongside Sontag.

*** Questions

—Main point of this lecture: Sontag is driving at: the difficulty, and the importance, of attending to the sensuous contours of the encounter; to insist on it, even if it is difficult; to develop a vocabulary, a way of speaking, a way of approaching aesthetics and the world that elaborates

Barthes, 49: on connotation & ideology; Barthes, 42: on the literal image.

Sontag, 227: “To emphasize style is to slight content, or to introduce an attitude which is neutral with respect to content. It goes without saying that the Camp sensibility is disengaged, depoliticized—or at least, apolitical.”

Sontag, 281: “Thus, the Camp sensibility is one that is alive to a double sense in which some things can be taken. But this is not the familiar split-level construction of a literal meaning, on the one hand, and a symbolic meaning, on the other. It is the difference, rather, between the thing as meaning anything, and the thing as pure artifice.”

286: on the good-bad axis of judgment

287: camp as “failed seriousness”

***

On the films: I’ll talk more about these later, but one version of how to understand these films turns on: what can you do when you dispense with narrative altogether, when you *only* have attraction. What you have is affective intensification, and a kind of literalism or insistence on the encounter. Warhol, Smith, and Rubin all in their ways insist on the encounter. (As did Hitchcock, with Psycho.) Not alienation but something else. Williams calls this “discipline.”

We’ll return on Wednesday to the films, and to their specific histories

***

WEDNESDAY:

General introduction:
—These films insist on something like the literal image (Barthes, Sontag).
—The literal image is (or can be) BORING

—Two questions:
(1) What kinds of discipline do you have to learn (or do you lack) to keep yourself absorbed in these films?
(2) What happens (or can happen) in a theatre when the point stops being to lose yourself in the world of a film?

Introducing Blow Job:
—Part of a series of films in the early 1960s, “Stillies”: Blow Job, Kiss, Empire, Sleep, screen tests
—They all have about the same form: unmoving, unbroken Bolex reels strung together; they’re silent, static, “unedited,” slowed down to silent speed
—Warhol would (in)famously set up the camera and just walk away

Introducing Flaming Creatures:
—Smith effectively dumpster-dived the film stock; it’s not a bad print, it’s a bad film
—This film does involve something like sexual assault/rape, but nothing’s really explicit or narrativized
—Recall Sontag’s claim that FC is a “delight for the senses”: How delighted are you? What delights you? How do you have to shift your viewing practice/posture to be delighted?

Introducing Christmas on Earth:
—Rubin made this film when she was 17. It is one of the greatest underground films ever made.
—This film is sexually explicit in the extreme.
—I’m really glad we could do this film this way here. I tried to rent a print, but the distributor and I, after a series of miscommunications, couldn’t manage to get it here. We have a digital print. (Describe the performance.)

Lecture:
—Solicit experiences of films

—General movement of post-WWII aesthetics: the gradual removal of subjectivity from art
—Modernism & Greenberg: a medium exploring its own limits: the fact of paint on canvas (Pollock, Rothko, Newman)
—Cage (4’33”). “We have eyes as well as ears and it is our business while we are alive to use them.”
—By the early 1960s: Warhol’s paintings/prints of commodities. Art embraces the commodity
—cf. Sontag’s camp: celebration of the artifice of the ordinary
—Underground film’s relationship to Hollywood: LOVE, but distance (Linda Williams: Kiss is about Hollywood).
—These films emphasize chance
—They also negate illusion, illusory space, narrative, absorption
—They are, in Michael Fried’s term, theatrical
—Link theatricality of underground film/avant-garde art to Hitchcock/Hollywood emphasis on moviegoing

—Re-solicit experiences of films

—Read individual films—none of which reward close analysis in the ordinary ways we approach them

—Blow Job: rejection of deep space; emphasis on the frame, duration (what are the facts of cinema? ——anticipate/elicit, also: presence in a theatre); denial of the event; surface beauty of the image; cf. Empire & furniture film
—Flaming Creatures: not knowing how film would develop; not scripted, subjugation of narrative to a series of “delights”; creatures, not characters; celebration of the queer possibilities for coupling
—Christmas on Earth: celebration of the aleatory; of the contingent; of the theatrical experience; of the arousal of one’s own body

—The categories from OH (Sitney’s Structural Film) don’t do these films justice (cf. Conrad, The Flicker). What they all do, unlike earlier avant-gardes is evacuate subjectivity, reject expression, insist on theatricality
—Re-pose the question: what does this theatricality do? What happens in a movie theatre when you stop being absorbed in what’s on the screen?
