# On doubleness and _Daisies_

* Logistics: Reminder: climate strike this Friday
* An honest assessment: it is very difficult for me to muster up much conviction lecturing about _Daisies_ and film in the 60s right now
* You should get involved; see https://climatechallenge.ca/ and https://www.facebook.com/XRToronto/

### On doubleness
* What figures for doubleness have we seen so far?
* Meaning vs. artifice; latent vs. surface meanings; narrative integration vs. attraction; production vs. expenditure
* These don't line up, exactly, but they're useful to hold in hand
* Let's generalize here: borrow from Michael Fried for one of the more useful versions of this distinction: **theatricality** vs. **absorption**. These are _tendencies_, aesthetic poles, not categories. A work like _Blow Job_ is _both_ theatrical and absorbed.
* _Absorbed_ art is art that has a relatively closed formal and textual economy; it operates, in some sense, without its viewer. Classicism of all kinds does this—Hollywood (e.g. eyelines), painting (i.e. representational painting) up until Impressionism. Any time there's a diegetic effect, we're dealing with some relation to absorption.
* _Theatrical_ art is art that explicitly acknowledges its viewer, is not complete in some sense until a viewer activates it. (There's a sophomoric "but all art needs a viewer", "trees falling in forests"—fine.) This is about explicit address and activation: breaking the fourth wall, calling for interpretation, shifting the burden of activity from the work to the beholder.
* We can see how this doubleness reframes the above ones.

### On the history and historiography of _Daisies_
* Czech cinema: Eastern bloc cinema has a more direct relationship with political history than Western cinemas
* Made under a regime of censorship: in many cases, this means an exacerbated relation to allegory. Films are seen as allegorical; they appear to have latent ideological content you must read for.
* _Daisies_ was made in a moment of cultural liberalization in the 1960s, in 1966; still, it was censored.
* But note that historically, we see a lot of constituents doing reading: the film censors; the filmmaker, Chytilova, at various points; a number of critics in Czechoslovakia and the West; retrospective appraisals by film historians
* This is exacerbated in a film economy where success in the West (e.g. Cannes, Venice) meant certain prestige filmmakers have a greater degree of freedom, which adds at least three audiences to certain kinds of films: the national audience, the ideological apparatus of the state; the Western art-world cinema.
* Note the concern of “aesthetic quality” in the primary & secondary historiography of Czech cinema, OH and Zalman. (Relation to _cinéma de qualité_ in France, and the reaction against _film de papa_)
* This is, however, a general condition: Cuban cinema, even now, is still always read as being about something other than it is: it's always about Fidel
* _Daisies_ is wonderful in that its invitation to allegory is endless; as Lim establishes (at length), it’s effectively a fully unstable semiotic economy

### Some theoretical considerations
* Lyotard on cinema and acinema: 54 ([im]mobility); 55 (psychic integration; gloss psychoanalysis); 56 (identification with capital and the production of subjectivity); 57 (cinema as the exclusion of expenditure); 59 (jouissance and theatricality)
* E.g., _Xmas on Earth_ does not recuperate its sexuality into narrative, commodity, or pornography (its interest in abstract movement laminated to desire); _Flaming Creatures_ is a disintegrated text, and its images are often interested in movement at the expense of the intelligibilty of the image;
* Finally, _Daisies_ does not turn on movement but rather a different kind of integration: it invites endless reading (without a point, without getting to the “correct answer”)

### On how to watch & read _Daisies_
* As Lim reads Daisies, there are multiple voices and multiple possibilities
* Censorship/ideological reading tends towards closure, e.g. “this is what the film means”
* For Lim, Daisies resists closure; this is part of what makes it feminist
* An iteration of the doubleness we’ve been tracing: delight for the senses (centrifugal, theatrical) vs. integration, meaningfulness of some kind (narrative integration, interpretive integration, absorption)
* As you watch _Daisies_, track the ways in which it invites intensification/attraction/delight vs. the ways it invites breakdown

### Break

### Our responses to _Daisies_
* Lim: pp. 64ff, on scissors, cutting, disintegration; but also, the promise of meaningfulness—it invites an activity of reading that cannot end, cannot rest
* Daisies as a machine for inviting (if not demanding; cf. state film apparatus & censorship) a reading without end: a reading without purpose other than itself (cf. Lyotard, acinema, expenditure)
