# Ideology

### Logistics
* You have a paper due on Friday!

### A new unit: apparatus theory
* Here we are, doing theory; it's fucking hard.
  - A shift in the phenomenology of learning
  - How to manage reading when you feel out to sea
  - Engagement vs. mastery and the cognitive and affective shifts in learning
* What is "apparatus theory"?
* Why apparatus theory?
  - It's at the core of the formation of cinema studies as a discipline.
  - But also: it's one of the more important movements in 1970s film culture
  - It also lets us tell some interesting stories about the relationships between aesthetics and politics in cinema
  - Finally, it's an important part of a broad left response to (May) 1968
* What was (May) 1968?
  - Enormous student strikes in France, but also the US and the rest of the West
  - Enormous ongoing struggles in colonized countries
  - There was a real sense that socialist revolution was coming to capitalist western democracies.
  - Needless to say, this didn't happen.
  - The wake of May 1968 in France produced an enormous outpouring of leftist thought: why didn't the revolution happen?
* A potted history of Marxist theory?
  - In its most important (to scholarship) applications, it turns towards the questions of why expected revolutions don't happen (30s and 70s)
  - The answer to why is, especially in the 70s: **ideology**
  - What is ideology?
  - Before we get to substance: it's an answer to the question: why don't the masses revolt? Or, phrased otherwise: how do the masses come to desire their own domination, exploitation
  - First, according to Rumsfeld
  - Then, according to Althusser (106, 109, 111)
  - Finally: ISAs, cf 96f & 103f.
