# The Anime Machine

You'll find the Q&A for Wednesday, March 18 at https://q.utoronto.ca/courses/114159/discussion_topics/576155. Scott will be responding in close-to-real-time between noon and 3pm.

### Logistics
First, a reminder: all the answers you seek about any changes to the course will be continually live at [CIN301 Revisions](https://github.com/kredati/cin301y19/blob/master/covid-19_revisions.md). This is the single source of truth, for all course staff and students. It's a lot of information---I know you're getting a lot of detailed information from a lot of sources right now, and it's a lot to parse while you're anxious and distracted. Know that it's all going to stay right there, consistently updated. I may direct your attention to a particular section if you have specific questions, and I may do what look like annoying flight-attendant moves, responding to individual email questions with announcements and changes to that document. I want to make sure information is a shared resource.

#### Marking scheme changes
As of this morning, I have 48 yes votes and 0 no votes for approving the changes to the marking scheme. That is exactly 50% of the registered students in the course. I need a single additional yes vote for there to be a majority approving the changes. Please [Vote](https://q.utoronto.ca/courses/114159/quizzes/62095) if you haven't already. As soon as I get a majority, I can pull the trigger on all the changes in [CIN301 Revisions](https://github.com/kredati/cin301y19/blob/master/covid-19_revisions.md)

#### Paper 4
Given that 100% of the votes so far are in favor of making changes, it's safe to ancitipate that we will be moving forward with my proposed changes. I'll release the new paper prompt once I have confirmation of those changes. In particular, the new due date would be April 25: please don't stress about this paper right now. I will make space for discussion of how to develop your own prompt in our online coursework at some point; please hold off on your questions for now.

#### Tutorial Marks
I have seen a few questions about tutorial marks. Again, please be patient. We've just made the tutorial marking _much_ more generous. For now, simply assume you're in a better position than you were two days ago. Your TAs and I are also working through massive disruption; we will do our best to get you tutorial marks as soon as we can, but that won't be for a spell. As usual, I beg your patience. And also: I implore you to relinquish, to the degree you can, your attachments to marks and marking and bureaucracy right now.

#### CR/NC Option
Our revisions will make marking more generous. (And expect more generous marking on Paper 4.) That said, I want to encourage most people (everybody?) to move to a CR/NC option for CIN301. As I understand it, you'll have plenty of time to decide later. Some universities are making pass/fail grading mandatory this term; I wish U of T would do that. (It won't.) But I do think that it's a wise idea for yourself, and for others, for as many students as possible to take the CR/NC option.

#### Discussion Boards
Discussion boards are now our primary method of interaction in CIN301. All our discussion boards are available at: https://q.utoronto.ca/courses/114159/discussion_topics.

### Thinking in a Crisis
Affect and attention management are hard in our technological surround to begin with. Many of you are currently in the throes of moving across the country, across borders. Some of you may have just discovered you can't cross the borders you thought you were going to be able to. Some of you may be dealing with new or renewed intimacy with family that may be distracting or toxic.

I want to suggest that you give yourself as much time & space as you can muster to not think about CIN301 or school. You can't do good thinking and learning right now.

This particular moment is, hopefully, if we are lucky, the most intensified moment of crisis: a passage from an old normal to a new normal. Reading, thinking, writing, critical analysis, creative process, good learning---for these to work, and to be worthwhile, all of these need predictability, calm, ongoingness, a trust in your surroundings. That is in short supply right now.

Once you get to what feels like a new normal: that's when you can return your attention profitably to matters humanistic and scholarly. 

That said, I know for some people, throwing themselves into work is what's grounding in that moment. I will do what I can to make sure CIN301 is an opportunity to do that grounding work, if that's what you need. (That said, I'm _not_ one of these people, so I beg your patience while I find my new normal.)

**tl;dr:** Be patient and compassionate with yourself, and with everybody. There's where I am right now.

### On Anime
We have spent a great deal of time thinking about the technology of cinema:
* Formal apparatus theory, e.g. Baudry, Metz, Mulvey
* Responses to/rejections off apparatus theory, e.g. hooks, Shaviro
* But also: the sense of cinema as naturally realistic, e.g. Cavell, and the comparative media approach that positions cinema as a particular kind of past-world technology.

Animation throws any stable sense we might have of cinema being a "realistic" technology into crisis.

#### _Ghost in the Shell_
I replaced _Akira_, which I couldn't find easily streaming, with _Ghost in the Shell_ for two reasins:
1. It's a film I'm quite familiar with. (I can also highly recommend the TV series, _GitS: Stand Alone Complex_.)
2. It is an anime that is explicitly about technology and its mediations, narratively and thematically, but also _formally_ and (if you will) mediatically.

Take the opening segment of _GitS_: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nOV_mpwkU8Y

We start with a version of the abstract information-space of computation (think about the early computer films we watched a few weeks ago): it has the same uneasy oscillation between flatness and depth as the Whitney and Mohr films, except that now it's in what's obviously 3D space. There's a filter on the images that is more like video than it is, really, computation: the rhetoric of "mediated vision" in _GitS_ is, throughout, as much organized by video as it is by digital computation.  Also, as a sonic counterpoint, the confusion of many "voices over radio" is confusing and disorienting---and again, falls back on a rhetoric of mediation that's not actually computational. The effect, in any event, a kind of aural close-up. Eventually, after a long "traveling shot" down through a cityscape, we finally see our protagnoist, the Major (as I'll call her). 

A few things become clear:
* She's our focal point. It's her point of view that will organize our experience both of the "real" world and the "virtual" world in the film. (Of course, since it's a film, both worlds are virtual.)
* That said, our identification with her takes place through means that are different than the kinds of identification that Mulvey gives us. Eyeline matching isn't nearly so important.
* Very quickly, we see that she's both protagonist _and_ the primary object of visual pleasure. The circuits of desire and identification here are quite different than what Mulvey describes, even above and beyond the different means of eliciting identification.
* As, in different ways, both Lamarre and Steinberg point out, _GitS_ requires a greater degree of filling-in-the-gaps on the part of spectators. This plays out at multiple levels at once:
  * There is simply less movement, less information: the backgrounds don't move, but rather the "camera" moves across a static backdrop.
  * Frame rates are lower: we see the operation of the technology of movement more than we usually do in cinema. Again, we're filling in information.
  * Even in this opening, but across the whole of _GitS_, we have to fill in a lot more narrative information that is only hinted at or suggested.
  
This last point is _GitS_'s inheritance from manga, Japanese graphic novels (or comic books): viewers, like readers who are piecing together the story from panel to panel, are doing much more active viewing. This is a decisive characteristic of anime.

#### Limiting Movement
Steinberg is very careful to show how theories of cinema that tend towards full, continuous, smooth, "natural" movement assume too much. Anime is interesting precisely because its limited movement---in its static backgrounds that move only by virtue of a moving camera, and in its character animation with lower framerates and animation loops---because it shows how cinema is not normatively a technology for "the impression of reality."

(I will point out that Steinberg is quoting both Metz and Lyotard here: folks we have read together earlier in the year.)

Steinberg argues that this limitation of movement means that anime are always referring to other media, bringing them "into the mix," to complete the picture: "A new image formation emerges from the rhythms of stillness and motion that inform limited animation, one that develops new circuits of return by bringing other media into the mix" (5).

Steinberg glosses Lamarre (we'll get to him in a second), this way:

> In his recent reconsideration of limited animation, Thomas Lamarre suggests that we must think of limited animation not in terms of immobility but rather in terms of the very mobility of the still image. As Lamarre argues, “it is impossible to understand the dynamism of these anime networks if we continue to think of limited animation on the model of stasis or stillness.” Limited animation, he suggests, is not characterized by stasis—as many proponents of full animation and critics of limited animation have suggested—but rather by a different kind of movement or dynamism. The only way to grasp anime’s media crossings is to take the dynamism of the still image seriously. (6)

The basic insight here is that---as we ultimately concluded about cinema in general---anime demands a kind of consideration that's resolutely multi-medial. In this case, we must attend to the _dynamism of the static image_. That sounds like a problem from painting and photography---and graphic media like manga! But it also means understanding the dynamism of that static image _as it is embedded into moving-image media_.

What Steinberg calls "dynamic immobility" is a particular problem for anime---since mobility _is_ possible, it becomes an aesthetically significant choice when and where and how anime moves.

To be sure, _GitS_ belongs to a prestige canon of anime, which is marked by a move towards fuller movement, closer to Disney than the cheaper televised anime (or Hanna Barbara cartoons) Steinberg is particularly concerned with. But my sense of how to read him is to show that limited animation is at the _heart_ of anime aesthetics, and that even films like _GitS_ have to be understood in the context of anime _as a medium of limited motion, which is to say, of dynamic immobility_.

### The Anime Machine
There are a few main points I'd like us to draw from Lamarre, that are similarly about adjusting some of the norms that have been common in Euro-American film theory:
* European and North American responses to modernity and post-modernity are not the only responses, and also not the normative ones.
* Anime, as a response to modernity and post-modernity in Japan, are not somehow specifically or essentially Japenese (even though they may be characteristically Japanese). It is important for those of us from North America do not take our experience as normative.
* Anime acknowledges its technological, political, and economic conditions---and is a remediation of them.
* This lets us see how _GitS_'s narrative and thematic concerns are also tied, decisively, to its formal and aesthetic problems. Think, too, about how _GitS_'s challenge for thinking about technology is about the nature of computation, and how to depict its reconfigurations of interiority, identity, plasticity---in a medium whose primary affordances are increased plasticity (Eisenstein calls it "plasmaticness"), and also only-conventional depictions of stable identity.
* Lamarre encourages us to think of the primary political and aesthetic problem of anime as _modulations of movement_, acceleration in terms of slowing and increasing movement. Again, the primary mediatic question of anime is that of _movement_, taken up in relation to "live action" cinema, manga, painting, and so on.
* Lamarre wants us to shift our figure of the technicity or technology of the cinema from _apparatus_ to _machine_. I'm not sure I'm on board with this particular shift, but it seems important that animation brings into new question what the technology of the cinema is or might be. In other words, the question is now how to understand (drawing from our media-theoretical lessons from the previous unit of the course) the ways _anime makes its technology significant_.

That's all for now. Again---you can AMA in the discussion board at https://q.utoronto.ca/courses/114159/discussion_topics/576155.
