# CIN301
## Concluding thoughts. Not a summary.

### Not a summary
I'm not going to try to summarize the course, but I do want to remind you where we've been. I'm not going to use the cutesy names I gave each of the units, but give you descriptive ones.

#### Unit 1: Cinema and Revolution in the 60s
The first unit, "Cinema and Revolution," really was a film-historical unit. It looked at filmmaking practices that invest the space of the theatre in various ways: New York Underground film, Czech New Wave, Third and Fourth Cinema. To address each of these film making practices, the scholary practices of film history must move away from the text and towards the scenes of circulation, distribution, and reception. It's not novel to think these matter! But each of these film practices _themselves_ call for an acknowledgment of these scenes of reception--and thus also address the scenes of film exhibition.

The reason we started with this history is that it prepares the way for the theoretical consideration in apparatus theory of spectatorship. One of the major claims I made in the first term is that the filmmaking practices of the 60s--that show a deep aesthetic investement in the scene of reception--are important precursors to the theory of the 1970s that show a deep conceptual investment in the scene of reception.

#### Unit 2: Apparatus Theory
The second unit, on apparatus theory, was then a history of the most important conceptual moment in the formation of film studies as a discipline: theory that elaborates a notion of the spectator. As I said, this conceptual elaboration is, to my mind, a recapitulation of the aesthetic elaboration of politicized film from the 1960s. (You can see much of apparatus theory as a set of footnotes to "Towards a Third Cinema.")

One of the important ideas in this unit of the course--beyond trying to understand what Lacan and Althusser and Metz and Mulvey are on about--is that the history of film theory is important as a kind of film history. The apparatus theorists write their theory driven by a set of interests in their present. Film studies as a discipline is especially theoretical in its foundations; it is not for nothing that film history, as a practice, must also turn towards film theory.

The other major idea in this unit of the course is that apparatus theorists--and people responding to it!--laid the foundations of film studies as a scholarly discipline, and that to understand the course of film studies as a discipline, you have to understand both apparatus theory and the various responses to it in the 1980s and 90s.

#### Unit 3: Comparative Media Study
The third unit of the course is organized by the idea that to understand cinema, you also have to understand the other media practices that surround it. Our major task was to develop methods of analysis that are able to set cinema and other media--painting, television, video, computation, YouTube--into relation, in order to understand each better.

The major idea here is that even the most literal version of film studies has to acknowledge that we no longer, quite, know what film or cinema is. And that the practices of analysis in film studies--film theory and film history--must, to do justice to their objects, develop ways of acknowledging the instability in what "film" or "cinema" means. In the present, but also over the course of history. In each act of film scholarship, the scholar develops an idea of what film is. It's best for those ideas to be explicit, and for those ideas to acknowledge their partiality, locality, and limitedness.

#### Unit 4: Film Studies Now
Our last, truncated, unit of the course surveys some of the most important aspects of film studies now: reception studies, globalization, animation studies, phenomenology, digital media studies. I programmed each of these to elaborate themes we touched on ealier in the course, and to elaborate themes across weeks (anti-hermeneutics, a move outside the text, the question of technology and media, and so on). These don't cohere as a story, but do resonate thematically and conceptually across weeks.

### What I hoped to teach you
I am not sure I have a specific or pointed take-away from the course. I have staged the course as braiding together a highly conceptual version of film history, and a historicist version of film theory. So I hope you have: a better understanding of film theory and its concerns; a better understanding of film theory as a practice that itself changes through history; a much more elaborated sense of the conceptual richness of the fields and practices of film history; and new ways of connecting formal analysis of film and other media to both film theory and film history.

My highest aspiration is to teach you what I know to call humanistic ways of thinking: a relinquishment of attachments to mastery, and pedagogies grounded in mastery; a resistance to categorizing and categorial thinking; a higher tolerance for not understanding things, and thus longer and more sustained encounters with what is irritatingly enigmatic in a film or piece of writing; indeed, perhaps, a newfound proclivity towards the enigmatic objects and their features you do not understand, as the most pressing places to do work; a practice of asking questions that is grounded in genuine curiosity and engagement. One of my mottos is that theory provides for better and more productive ways of failing to understand things. It seems twee to say it, but I hope to have taught you not how to understand things, but how to fail to understand them, and then how to do something with that not-understanding.

This is why our pedagogy has been driven by question-asking, both in the lecture hall and in tutorials. This is also why when we have done film history, it has not felt like the film history you have done in previous courses. And this is also why I have resisted accounts of theory that prioritize feelings of mastery and clarity. Often, the theory really isn't clear, and really is hard, and I am more interested, in the long run, in your tolerance for ambiguity and uncertainty, than I am in your ability to correctly rehearse the moves of _The Imaginary Signifier_ or "Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema." Unless you make terrible life choices and decide to dedicate your life to academia, you won't need to know the latter; but, to my mind, the former are _very important_ to many (even most) endeavours in life.

That's kind of a lot, and it sounds very hippie-ish and twee, I imagine. But it's at the core of why I care about humanistic theory, and why I think it's important to teach it. The technical stuff, the bureaucracy, the correct answers, the marks: those aren't what I care about. It's the spirit of the thing, the questions, the enigmas, the unclarity. Now more than ever, as the pandemic is surely in the middle of radically changing the world we only barely knew how to live in: we need to get comfortable with our failures to grasp everything about the world around us, and to figure out how to do something that matters to us anyway.
